I would like to conclude this module with
some advice on Excel charts to avoid.
Given the ubiquity of Excel it
is highly susceptible to misuse.
Excel offers an array of
options of different charts,
unfortunately not all charts available
in Excel are effectively used for data.
As a general rule any chart that does not
show data effectively should be avoided.
To start with,
all 3D charts should be avoided.
As we discussed in an earlier video,
3D display distorts the value of data and
often leaves wrong visual impression.
In addition, since the 3rd dimension is
typically not based on data you have,
it can significantly
decrease the data ink ratio.
We've also discussed before
that pie charts in general
should be avoided because it forces reader
to make difficult area comparisons.
That is,
comparing the area of the pie slices.
Or in the same logic,
donut chart should also be avoided,
that is just a variant of pie chart.
Stacked area charts should be avoided
because it is difficult to understand and
interpret.
In these sample stacked area chart
we are showing two data series.
Notice that the pattern of the top data
series is quite difficult to discern
because it is stacked
above the bottom one.
In this particular example the first
impression is that there is
an upward trend in this data series
which turns out not to be true when
we examine the graphs more closely.
The upward trend we picked up is actually
from the data series in the bottom.
This line graph shows
the same two data series.
From the line graph it is apparent that
one of the data series has an upward trend
and the other one shows
a straight downward trend.
This pattern is completely
lost in a stacked area chart.
Because stacked area charts are typically
used to show variables on the same scale,
we can almost always convert them
to line graphs as I did here.
Another very popular chart that is
not effective is stacked bar chart.
It has same issues as stacked
area chart where the trend for
all data series except
the bottom one is masked.
They too can often be
converted to line graphs.
A couple of other charts that should
probably be avoided include radar chart,
circle chart, funnel charts and
waterfall charts.
This charts can be used for
exam situations but
should be avoided most of the time.
I could provide a much longer,
longer list of charts to avoid but
it is perhaps more important to
remember that core principles.
Any chart that does not show data
effectively should be avoided.
Always ask yourself whether the chart
shows the data in the intended manner, and
is easy to digest for your audience.